Malachi 2:15:
“Do not deal treacherously
with the wife of your youth.”
Now, in Malachi’s day,
apparently Jewish husbands
were dealing treacherously with their wives
by divorcing them,
sometimes on frivolous grounds
and perhaps so as to marry younger women.
And the term “treacherously”
was very appropriate.
Here the Hebrew word means
to “deal deceitfully, . . . unfaithfully.”
A form of this verb means to be a traitor.
And how Jehovah feels about this
is no wonder that he says what he does
in verse 16,
where he says:
“For I hate divorce.”
Jehovah hates treacherous, deceitful conduct.
Jehovah hates traitors.
At Proverbs 2:22,
it says that “the treacherous
will be torn away from [the earth.]”
Well, happily, the majority of marriages
in Jehovah’s organization
do not experience such treachery.
However, caution is still needed.
You see, it’s possible
for even a once beautiful relationship
to begin to sour.
And not only in marriage,
but in any relationship:
between two very close friends,
between us and the organization,
even between us and Jehovah.
Well, in Malachi chapter 2,
Jehovah here gives us a formula
for never letting things get to that point.
Look again at the latter part of verse 15.
He says:
“So guard yourselves respecting your spirit,
and do not deal treacherously.”
Verse 16, the latter part of it says:
“And guard yourselves
respecting your spirit.”
So you think about it.
How does somebody get to the point
where they begin to deal treacherously
with their beloved husband or wife?
How does somebody get to the point
where two friends can no longer speak civilly
with each other?
How does somebody get to the point
when they turn
against Jehovah’s organization?
Well, see,
long before they get to that point,
something has been brewing under the surface.
Thus the comment:
“Guard yourselves respecting your spirit.”
And why is that appropriate?
Well, grudges, harsh words,
unresolved misunderstandings,
questioning decisions that are made,
see, this can begin to fester
and begin to rot a relationship
from the inside out
if left unchecked.
Now, we can see this by looking at
(illustrate this by looking at) the example
of two traitors in the Bible,
Abiathar and also Judas.
Now, Abiathar was a high priest
who stuck with David right from the beginning
when Saul was trying to kill him
through David’s kingship.
Even when Absalom turned traitor
and tried to take over the kingship,
Abiathar was faithful to David.
But later in life, Abiathar became a traitor.
He sided with David’s other son Adonijah
when he tried to take over the kingship.
What happened?
Were there some unresolved issues
that Abiathar buried?
In 1 Samuel chapter 22,
it’s recorded
where King Saul had Doeg kill
Abiathar’s father, who was the high priest,
and 85 other priests
because David went to Abiathar’s father
and asked him for some bread
and also a sword.
Only Abiathar escaped,
and he joined David’s camp.
Well, was this
an unresolved issue with Abiathar?
Did he secretly always have in his mind,
‘You know,
if David had never involved my family,
perhaps my father would still be alive’?
And then there could be
what could be seen as a rivalry,
or a competition,
between Abiathar and Zadok.
Now, Zadok was also a priest
and a prophet.
At 1 Chronicles 12:28,
he’s called
“a mighty and courageous young man.”
However, he served with Saul
until Saul’s death,
and then after Saul’s death,
he joined David’s camp.
Well, from then on,
David used Abiathar and Zadok together.
In fact, they’re usually listed together,
but it’s of interest
that Zadok is always listed first,
even though Abiathar was the high priest.
Did Abiathar secretly maintain
some feelings of jealousy
or animosity toward Zadok?
See, Zadok, though he was a priest,
he wasn’t killed
when Saul exterminated the priests.
Zadok sided with Saul,
and now he’s the favored one in David’s camp
next to Abiathar,
who had been faithful to David
right from the beginning!
See, were there some seeds of competition
that grew between these two men?
Whatever it was,
what aspect of Abiathar’s spirit
did he not guard
that caused him
to eventually turn traitor against David?
Now, another example is that of Judas.
He showed
the ultimate betrayal and treachery.
Now, no doubt,
Judas at one time loved Jesus dearly
and enjoyed
a very close relationship with him.
His very appointment as an apostle
indicates that.
Judas was also entrusted
with caring for the finances
of Jesus and the Twelve.
And this also reflects favorably on him,
especially when you consider
that this assignment
wasn’t given to Matthew,
who had experience in handling the finances.
And we can just picture
Judas there in the beginning,
listening to Jesus words, eating with him,
laughing with him and the others.
But somewhere along the line,
something started to develop in his spirit.
Now, if you look in John chapter 6,
we read in that account
when many of the disciples
were stumbled by Jesus’ words
regarding his flesh and his blood,
and they left off following him.
In verse 61, John 6:61,
it says that ‘the disciples began to murmur.’
In verse 67,
Jesus asks the Twelve,
he says:
“You do not want to go also, do you?”
And we often focus
on Peter’s beautiful words of loyalty.
But we also—
It seems that at this point,
Jesus was starting to see
seeds of bitterness
starting to grow in Judas.
Look at what it says at John 6:70, 71:
“Jesus answered them:
‘I chose you twelve, did I not?
“Yet one of you is a slanderer.’
He was, in fact, speaking
of Judas the son of Simon Iscariot.”
You see, was Judas starting to listen
to those who were beginning
to murmur against Jesus?
At John 12:6,
we’re told that Judas “was a thief.”
He would take money from the money box.
Well, when did that start?
Was that after he saw
some decisions made with the finances
that he didn’t quite agree with?
According to Matthew’s and Mark’s accounts,
it appears that seeing
Mary pour the perfumed oil on Jesus
was the last trigger for Judas.
He strongly objects,
and Jesus strongly rebukes Judas
on that occasion
right in front of everybody.
And Judas,
no doubt stung by these words, leaves,
and just a few days later,
he betrays Jesus to the priests.
Well, what is the point?
Things happen in our life:
an injustice, a misunderstanding,
strong discipline,
being embarrassed in public,
maybe feelings of jealousy
over privileges that somebody else has.
See, these things happen to all of us
at one time or another
in our life or through our life.
And each time this happens,
it drops a little seed, if you will,
into our heart.
And if left unchecked,
a poisonous root can begin to grow
that eventually can cause us
to become a traitor
against our marriage mate,
against our close friend,
against the organization,
or even against Jehovah.
So, what do we do?
Malachi 2:15:
“Guard yourself respecting your spirit.”
And notice what it says at Hebrews 12:15
—Hebrews 12:15.
It says: “Carefully watch
that no one fails to obtain
“the undeserved kindness of God,
“so that no poisonous root springs up
to cause trouble and many are defiled by it.”
Well, how do we go about
digging up poisonous roots?
Well, by following the beautiful principles
we have in the Bible
at Matthew 5:23, 24 and Matthew 18:15.
When there are problems,
when there are misunderstandings,
talk it out.
Work it out.
Do not leave them buried and unresolved.
Seek to gain our brother or sister.
Matthew 18:35:
“Forgive [our] brother from [the] heart.”
Forgive and let go and move on.
John 13:34:
“Love one another.”
Think back to when we fell in love
with our husband or wife.
What caused us to fall in love with them?
What caused us to develop that close bond
between us and our best friend?
What was it that convinced us
that this is the truth?
Think back to that.
And, see, every time we do these things,
we’re pulling out
one of those poisonous roots
and stopping it from growing.
It’s an ongoing process
that we do over and over again.
So may all of us be determined
to guard ourselves respecting our spirit.
Now is not the time
to allow any poisonous roots
to begin to grow within us.
Keep our love for and our relationship
with our mate (if we’re married),
with our friends, with the organization,
and with Jehovah strong.
And this will help us
to stay loyal to loved ones
and to Jehovah
now and in the days to come.